hello welcome to this AWS webinar my
name's Ian Massingham I'm a Technical
Evangelist with amazon web services
based in Europe I'm going to be hosting
today's session which is a master class
series webinar focusing on Amazon
redshift so our fast petabytes scale
data warehouse service the master class
series of webinars are intended to
provide a deep dive into specific AWS
services that complemented by another
series that we run called the journey
through the cloud journey through the
cloud is a solutions orientated look at
how you can apply AWS services to solve
particular use cases or deal with
different business challenges that you
might face you can find links to both
webinar series in the links panel you
can see in the webinar interface if
you're watching this live or in the
video description if you're watching
this webinar on the AWS webinars youtube
channel also if you're watching live you
can see a files panel and there is
available a PDF of the materials from
today's session of advise downloading
that if you're watching the session live
you'll find there were many links on
quite a few of the slides that we're
going to be covering today where you can
find further information also links to
relevant documentation on the topics
that we're going to be covering today
you can also find the materials on
SlideShare and if you're watching on
demand you will find a link to the
relevant SlideShare presentation in the
video description on YouTube the other
thing that you can see only in the live
interface is a Q&A panel and we're
unlikely to have time to answer
questions at the end of today's session
so if you do have any questions please
do submit these using that Q&A panel and
I will make sure that a member of our
solutions architecture team follows up
with you in email over the course of the
next couple of weeks we do answer all
questions from all webinars so if you do
have questions don't worry if we don't
get to them during today's session we
will cover them after the event also
show you a couple of social media links
at the end of today's session where
you'll be able to stay up to date with
AWS globally and also AWS here in the UK
and Ireland so have twitter ready for
that at the end of the session and
lastly at the very end of the session
will also put the webinar into a Q&A and
feedback mode where you'll be able to
give us a rate
from one to five with five being the
best let us know how we've done give us
some feedback and help us optimize this
webinar for future audiences that might
watch it I just like to say that we also
present the two webinar series both the
master class series and the journey
through the cloud series in conjunction
with Intel great AWS technology partner
we'd like to thank Intel for their
support in helping us run this webinar
program during 2015 as I said if you're
interested in the back webinars that
we've already recorded so far this year
take a look at the series pages that you
can see in that links panel in the
webinar interface and catch up with the
stuff that we've already covered over
the course of 2015 ok that's enough
housekeeping let's move on now to
today's content so this is a master
class series webinar it's a technical
deep dive that's going to be a go beyond
the basics on one specific AWS service
its intended to educate you have to get
the best out of the service that we're
covering show you how things work and
illustrate how you can get things done
with one specific AWS surveys and today
we're covering Amazon redshift it's a
fast fully managed petabyte scale data
warehouse that runs in the AWS cloud it
makes it simple and cost-effective for
you to analyze all your data you can
continue to use existing business
intelligence ETL and visualization tools
and it's a very scalable service that
enables you to start small and scale
well beyond the petabyte with current
limits and it costs less than one
thousand dollars per terabyte per year
to operate this is roughly one-tenth the
cost of traditional on-premises data
warehouse TCO it's a very
cost-effective way to get access to high
performance and high quality analytical
services that you can use to turn your
organization into a data-driven
enterprise the fundamental
characteristics of the survey as well as
you might expect for a data warehouse
the services optimized precisely for the
data warehousing use case it's capable
of providing very high query performance
on data sets that might range from 100
gigabytes to well over a petabyte it
uses modern data warehousing
architectural approaches like column
storage data compression and zone
mapping to reduce the amount of I
that is needed to perform queries and
can offer significantly about the better
performance than trying to put OLTP
optimized where warehouses to use so
databases to use in this use case
provide an MPP architecture massively
parallel processing architecture which
enables the system to paralyze and
distribute SQL operations taking
advantage of all the resources that are
available in your cluster and the
underlying hardware itself is designed
for high performance data processing
using features such as locally attached
storage to maximize throughput between
CPUs and drives and a 10 gigabit
ethernet mesh network to maximize
throughput between nodes like all AWS
services you can control amazon redshift
using the AWS api this is a feature that
you can use to very easily change the
number or type of nodes in your data
warehouse in accordance with your
capacity needs there also a couple of
different node types that we're going to
cover in a little bit more detail during
today's session that allow you to
optimize around IO and cpu performance
or around capacity you can also resize
clusters as well show you towards the
end of today's session on demand this is
a non-disruptive operation that allows
you to seamlessly migrate data between
old and new cluster with different
dimensions doesn't interrupt query
performance while you do that it's also
a cost-effective service once again like
all AWS services you can choose
on-demand pricing with no upfront costs
or no long-term commitments or you can
optimize your costing so cost
significantly by using discounting
that's available with reserved instance
pricing I'm going to cover pricing in
detail today but if you want to learn
more about that visit the Amazon
redshift pricing page that will show you
towards the end of the session once
again today simple service that enables
you to get started very quickly and it's
fully managed and this management
service also covers aspects of fault
tolerance so if nodes in your cluster do
fail we will transparently replace those
for you we take steps to protect your
data both with replication in the
cluster as well as with continuous and
automated backups that are taking place
and will show you a process for
restoring from backup later in today's
session the I encryption features so you
can take advantage of several different
AWS
encryption services network isolation so
you can place your Amazon redshift
cluster inside an Amazon VPC or virtual
private cloud connect it to your own
existing IT infrastructure using an
industry standard ipsec VPN or our
direct connect service and then lastly
for compatibility it's an SQL data
warehousing solution li users industry
standard ODBC and jdbc connections you
can download our custom JDBC and odbc
drivers from the client connect tab in
the redshift console and from there
you'll be able to use popular business
intelligence ETL and visualization tools
many of which have been certified by
their vendors to provide full support
for Amazon redshift there's integration
with other AWS services as well as these
industry standard connectivity
mechanisms enabling you to parallel load
data for example from s3 DynamoDB or
from other AWS data sources that you may
be taking advantage of so it's a very
very capable service and it's a service
which has been around a little while we
launched amazon redshift during november
2012 and as the original post here from
jeff bars blog back in 2012 where he
announced the launch of the service also
explaining that customers like Netflix
nasa/jpl and Flipboard had been testing
redshift is part of a private beta and
in November 2012 we launched a limited
public beta for the service so we've
been in operations with Amazon redshift
for coming up to three years now and it
was at the time it was launched the most
rapidly adopted AWS service in history
and that rapid adoption has enabled us
to iterate on the service pretty rapidly
and pretty successfully over the period
since it was launched in 2012 we'll come
back to this most recent function most
recent feature on user-defined functions
towards the end of the session to look
talk a little bit more about this but if
you are interested in keeping up with
enhancements to Redshift over time you
may want to bookmark the URL you can see
on this slide which is the Amazon
redshift category on the official AWS
blog and you'll find there are many
many updates to these services we add
new features that have been requested
and back prioritized by customers and of
course if there's something that you
feel is missing from Redshift today
then do contact us via your solutions
architect or via your account manager
and let us know how we can improve the
service for you make it more suitable
for your specific use case always
interested in getting feedback on how we
can improve existing services so what do
we have for you today in terms of the
agenda first of all we're going to talk
about why you might run your data
warehouse on AWS as an alternative to
other options that of course available
to you talk about getting started a
little bit on table design and data
loading talk about how you can work with
data what kind of tools you can use for
that then we'll talk about backup and
restoration upgrading and scaling
scaling and we'll close out by talking
about some resources that you can use to
continue to build your knowledge after
today's session so why run your data
warehouse on AWS well in some ways there
are parallels between traditional
database management services that you
might provide on your on-premises so on
IT infrastructure that you operate and
with operating data warehouses in that
way they're typically expensive the
difficult and time-consuming to
administer they are challenging to scale
and often scaling these systems can
require very expensive upgrades as well
as a significant investment in
resourcing at your own resourcing or
consulting resourcing to scale up and
replace data warehouses as they grow and
then fourthly there's quite a bit of
locking with these systems part of that
is actually to do with cost customers
are often reluctant to change because of
the significant capital investment
involved in acquiring implementing and
operating databases and most most more
specifically data warehousing services
we're trying to tackle some of these
challenges when we create a damaged and
Redshift in response to the fact the
customers were asking us to deliver data
warehousing in a way which was
consistent with the way in which we
deliver the services so easy to
provision and easy to scale up
eliminating those upfront costs and
available at a pay-as-you-go model with
of course the opportunity to further
optimize costs if you want to make a
resource reservation with reserved
instances offering really fast
performance and being open and flexible
with support for popular bi tools
enabling you to get your data in and out
of Amazon redshift in a very simple and
familiar way and the architecture of the
system is such that Amazon redshift
paralyzes and distributes all operations
that take place within the cluster the
cluster comprises a leader node where
you make your JDBC or odbc connection
and then the leader node coordinates
activity Vivat e a cluster across a
cluster comprising a number of compute
nodes and these compute nodes as we said
earlier are connected together by this
10 Gigabit Ethernet mesh and take
advantage of local storage to deliver
optimal IO throughput and we provide a
framework automation framework that
enables you to query load back up with
store and resize both the cluster and
data that's stored within the cluster in
a very very seamless manner very simple
well we'll cover many of these back
aspects in more detail during today's
session on scaling you have several
options firstly there are different
types of compute nodes that you can use
to build your Amazon redshift cluster
these comprise dc1 nodes which are
dense compute nodes available in two
sizes the dc1.large nodes
comprise 15 gigs of RAM, 2 virtual cores
they have 10 Gigabit Ethernet
interconnect and they have 160 gigs of
solid-state capacity in each node so by
using a single node you can access 160
gigabytes of SSD capacity and then
scaling with a cluster from 2 to
32 nodes you can take advantage
of between 320 gigabytes and just over
5TB of solid-state capacity
with those DC 1 nodes you then have the
dc1.8xlarge nodes here you have much
more memory 244 gigs per node, 32 virtual
cores per node and the cluster
size is significant
large as well so you can go from 2 to 128
nodes and 128 notes will give you up to
326TB of solid state storage
capacity within your cluster so you're
going to find these are optimized for
smaller data sets and higher performance
in terms of data throughput off those
drives solid-state drives by virtue of
their fundamental characteristics offer
higher performance and lower latency IO
response then if you need to have a
larger cluster capable of taking more
data so working with larger data sets
here you have the ds2.8xlarge nodes
these are rotational magnetic storage
equipped so I don't have solid state
drives in them they have traditional
rotational hard disks in them still
carrying 244 gigs of ram but here you
have 36 virtual cores to work with 10 GigE interconnect of course
and 16TB of magnetic rotational
hard disk capacity per node you can
cluster between 2 and 128 nodes in
this instance which delivers up to two
terabytes of magnetic rotational hard
disk capacity for your cluster so for
working with very large data sets the
ds2.8xlarge is an excellent answer back
to that question we've done some work as
i said earlier to provide an automation
framework which helps make it easier for
you to run an operate amazon redshift
clusters includes features like built-in
security so in transit rest and also a
mag backed up using encryption back up
to amazon s3 which is continuous
incremental and automatic and we'll show
you how to restore from backup slater on
in today's session this streaming
restore methodology that's used and now
allows you to resume querying more
rapidly when restoring a cluster from
backup and we also help deal with
failure modes both disk failure modes
and node failures recovering nodes and
replacing drives automatically so that
you don't have to take any action in the
event of these failure scenarios so the
typical architecture would be your
clients of course communicating with
your JDBC or odbc endpoint and then
transparently in the background
Amazon redshift cluster is being
protected and data has been stored
automatically on Amazon s3 with the
familiar 99.999999999% of durability that
that offers and of course the facility
to keep your data in a
specific AWS region the specified so we
won't move data into regional su
instruct us to do so using one of our
tools that make available and this of
course is a mechanism for ensuring that
you're not moving data outside of
regions which may breach regulatory or
compliance obligations that are placed
upon you so the standard AWS security
model applies to Amazon which redshift
just as it does to any other service
that we provide to you use some
techniques that have become more common
now actually in columnar MPP data
warehouses but we're actually pretty
revolutionary when they were first
dreamed up first invented so the idea
that you can store data in a column not
orientated format using compression
using zone maps so this is a feature
whereby each node knows the range of
values that are stored upon it and it
can therefore we only respond to queries
needs to respond to queries where it's
been asked for data that is present on
the node and this can dramatically
improve query performance by minimizing
IO IO however is accelerated through the
use of direct attached storage and also
accelerated for large scale or large
reads through the use of
large data block sizes so whole system
is optimized for read intensive scan
based workload such as the type that
are typical when performing queries on
data so old systems built for that and
the fact that the system is built
specifically for optimizing query based
workloads has led to some really good
results for customers this is a super
quiet really like this from jana Donovan
was the CTO at the Financial Times talks
about implementing Amazon redshift as a
way for them to increase the speed
performance and flexibility of data
analysis and when implementing redshift
they found that they achieved a
ninety-eight percent performance
improvement in their query runtimes fact
the performance was so
John and his team first glance thought
the system wasn't functioning because it
was so quick they then ran this system
in parallel with their pre-existing
warehousing solution and they verified
that the queries were performing quickly
they were just performing extremely fast
because of some of those optimization
techniques that I talked about a few
minutes ago they're also able to reduce
their infrastructure costs by over
80% in comparison to a
traditional data center based model so
real strong success story for the FT and
at the end of the session will show you
a link where you can learn more about
this case study and also other customers
that have chosen to run data warehouses
on Amazon redshift let's move
on now and take a look at getting
started and using the AWS console to
access and create a redshift cluster is
very simple so in your typical AWS
console view you'll find that redshift
the sub console for this specific
service is organized in the database
category and if you click on that you'll
be taken to one or two views if you've
never created a redshift cluster before
you'll see this which tells you a little
bit about the service and gives you
access to some resources that you can
use to learn a little bit more about how
you might make use of Amazon redshift if
you have used the service before you'll
see this screen which is the cluster the
redshift cluster dashboard and in either
event you're going to click on that
launch cluster button and you'll then be
taken into the two familiar AWS
wizard-based work through to create a
new service instance he has to populate
some information about your cluster and
identify a name for the database that
you wish to use the database port that
you wish to make use of a user name and
a master user password that you're asked
to set click continue or into those
fields rather and click continue and you
can then specify the dimensions of your
cluster by choosing your node type and
by selecting whether you want to have a
single node or multi node cluster and
specifying the number of compute nodes
that you wish to comprise your cluster
you can enter those values here click
continue once again and then you'll be
asked to enter additional configuration
details and this is where you can do
things like set security parameters for
your redshift cluster for example
specifying how you wish to have your
database encrypted you're going to
make use typically of the Amazon Web Services
key management service here or a cloudHSM
a hardware security module
if you have one of those configured and in use
in your account in the specific region
you've selected you can also use a hsm
kms beyond the scope of this webinar if
you want to learn more about kms and HSM
visit the AWS Security Center at
awsamazon.com/security and you can find
information about both of those services
there you're also configuring networking
options here choosing which VPC you wish
to deploy the service into which will
place it into a specific subnet and also
into a specific availability zone when
you select the specific subnet group
that you wish to deploy into you can
specify whether you want the cluster to
be accessible from the public internet
or whether you want it to be accessible
only from within your private VPC you
can specify a public IP address if you
wish to do so or not if you wish to keep
your address privately rootable address
only and then you can specify the
availability zone that you wish to place
in and then specify VPC security groups
that you wish to associate with this
cluster and these VPC security groups
are important because these are the
security groups that will allow your
clients add to communicate with your
cluster so you're going to set a
security policy on those security groups
that allows set of client hosts to
communicate with your cluster and
exchange traffic with it this stage you
can also create and configure a cloud
watch alarm if you select the option
you'll get this additional drop down
here and this allows you to specify a
disk usage alarm for your cluster
publishing that to an existing SNS topic
and sending yourself
an email when the cluster reaches the
particular disk usage threshold that
you've set it's a good idea to do that
of course if you're going to load data
into your classics it will enable you to
manage scenarios
where you run out of cluster storage and
need to potentially resize your cluster
if you hit continue at that point you'll
be asked to review what you've specified
you'll get a warning here if you're not
applicable or eligible for the free
trial and this will specify what your
hourly on demand rate for your cluster
will be also offers some guidance as the
way you can access documentation about
reserve nodes in order to optimize your
costs if you're going to win a cluster
you at all concerned about optimizing
your costs then check out reservation
options that are available to you to
minimize that and also make sure you
familiar with the Amazon redshift
pricing that you can see linked out at
the bottom of that screen as well once
you hit launch cluster you then told
that your cluster is being created by
this pop-up and if you close that you'll
be taken to the clusters dashboard where
you can see the status of your cluster
as it's being created you can also of
course at this point click on the
cluster name and here you can see
additional information about the cluster
while it's under creation after a few
minutes and it typically takes around 10
minutes to create an Amazon redshift
cluster your cluster status will switch
to available your DB health will switch
to healthy and you'll show that you've
come out of maintenance mode and if you
click on the cluster again at this point
you can expand out the cluster document
at cluster settings and you can see your
cluster database properties at this
point and at that point you're ready to
start loading data using familiar jdbc
and odbc connectivity from the regular
ETL or data management tools that you
use so it's very very simple to setup
and very very quick it's a good example
actually of abstraction layer that makes
it much quicker to deliver a service
that's useful to you who are using AWS
than it is building something similar
through more traditional approaches
where you might procure software and
hardware and build a service yourself
off to describe Amazon redshift is a
great starting point for customers that
aren't familiar with some of the
benefits of speed you can get if you
take advantage of the AWS cloud
because it is so quick and simple to
provision a cluster using this console
based interface of course that's also
available via the CLI and via the SDKs
that we provide as well some additional
stuff about getting started so the first
of all is an excellent getting started
guide for Amazon redshift that you can
find if you visit the URL that's at the
bottom right of this screen there's also
a two month free trial for set size
duster that you can take advantage of a
very good getting started tutorial
there's an excellent system overview
there are guides for table design
loading and query design which we're
going to cover in a little bit more
detail in a few minutes there's a
description of how you can connect to
your database using these industry
standard connection protocols and
there's also in that getting started
guide some really good pointers to BI
and ETL vendors have certified their
tools for use with adam amazon redshift
so getting started guides for AWS
services are generally pretty good but
the one for redshift in my view is one of the
best so really would advise if you've
got any interest in making use of the
service you spend a few minutes
familiarizing yourself with that getting
started guide we're going to move on now
take a look table design families and
redshift and three topics that we're
going to cover here firstly we're going
to take a look at
compression encodings and we'll take a
look at data types and lastly we'll take
a look at distributing data across nodes
and sorting data to optimize performance
and a data warehousing system has very
different design goals when you compare
them with traditional transaction
orientated RDBMS systems so OLTP
applications that typically focused on
single row transactions inserts and
updates but data warehouses like Amazon
redshift are optimized along a different
vector which is fast execution of
complex analytical queries against very
large data sets because of the massive
amount of data involved in this kind of
workload you must specifically design
your database to take full advantage of
performance optimizations is precisely
what we've done with Amazon redshift and
the first important performance
optimization is compression this is a
column level operation that
reduces the size of data when it
stored because it reduces the size of
data when it's stored it has two effects
firstly it conserves storage space and
secondly it reduces the size of data
that is read from storage and this can
dramatically reduce the amount of disk
IO and therefore can dramatically
improve query performance to a plot you
can apply compression encodings two
columns in tables manually based on your
own evaluation of data and that's an
option that's open to you but you can
also use the copy command that's
provided to redshift and if you do this
it will analyze and apply compression
automatically and we strongly recommend
using the copy command to apply
automatic compression you can use
automatic compression when you create
and load a new table and
when you do this the copy command will perform that
compression arses you can also perform a
compression analysis
without loading data or changing the compressional
table by running a command called analyze
compression
against an already populated table so you can run this when you want
to analyze compression of the table for
future use while you preserve the
existing data description language for that table
data types
many different data types that are supported within
Amazon redshift and one that's worth
calling out is the VARCHAR this
supports multi-byte characters but only
up to a maximum of three bytes so 4 byte
or longer characters are not
supported that's simple it's worth being
aware of if you want to learn more about
supported data types in amazon redshift
visit the URL you can see bottom right
here there's more comprehensive
discussion and description of the data
types that are available to you
when you load data into amazon redshift tables
schemas need to be expressed ideally in
third normal form and we're going to
talk a little bit about how schema and
data distribution into play with one
another now and in distributing data
it's important to remember that redshift
is a distributed system it's containing
a leader node which contains the query
plan our and schedules queries and
aggregates results from queries but the
queries themselves take place across
compute nodes and each compute node
contains slices one slice per core and a
slice is a logical container for data
they're chosen on two types of
distribution round robin which can
be automated or on a distribution key
where you define a column hash is
computed and data is distributed in
accordance with that hash this is very
important because queries run on all
slices in parallel and optimal query
throughput can only be achieved when
data is spread as close to evenly as
possible across slices what you want to
do ideally is have queries executed on
cause working on data which is local to
them and in an optimized distribution of
the type that you can see here the
distributed nature of the system can
cause significant performance overhead
here's a scenario where we've
round-robin distributed item details
across slices but our
order details have been distributed
independently so we have no distribution
key we're using default distribution
which is an optimized and
you can see that if we want to join orders with
items that were relevant to those orders
we'd have lots of internode traffic
web traffic for example from node one
relating to order one we'd have to make
a subquery into node three getting data
from the second slice there about item
1.1 and joining it and also getting data
from the second slice on node two and
joining that into the query relating to
the sub items on each order to help us
do the calculation you can
see at the top of this slide now with an optimized
distribution we're going to store the
sub items for each order adjacent
to them because we've used a customized
distribution we've ordered the
distribution key that we're using is
items.orderID so that enables us to
colocate the item records together with
the order records on the same nodes
this leads to dramatically improve
performance because the zero internode
traffic in this model everything's
intra-node on the compute nodes themselves and
the aggregate data is passed back to the
leader nodes much much improved
performance how can you choose
distribution keys when you want to look
for data that's frequently joined
by the most commonly run queries and you can
also evaluate looking at queries that
compute consume the most cpu and use
that as a mechanism for identifying how
you should distribute data you want a
high cardinality so keys that have got a
large number of discrete values because
we're using hashing here we want good
hash distribution and then you want to
have low skew you don't want to have hot
spots and you can use query STV block
list identify skew factor in a data set
a sorting here we're talking about
sorting data by a sort key and trying to
choose a sort key that is frequently
used in your key query so as a query
predicate like the date range perhaps or
an identifier or was a join parameter
and it can also be the hash key and this
sort key allows us to use those zone
maps to avoid reading entire blocks
based on predicates so for example if
you had a table that contained a
timestamp sort key you were looking for
a recent date range you'd entirely skip
reading any blocks that contained old
data where the zone map showed that
these blocks did not include data that
was relevant to your query and again
this can minimize intra-node traffic so
internode traffic and dramatically
improve query performance so sorting is
critically important for query
performance optimization as well and
then lastly schema design you want to
optimize your data for querying it's
pretty obvious for query orientated
workloads so you want to colocate
frequently join tables using those
distribution keys to avoid data
transfers between nodes we said and you
want to use sort keys on joined columns
allowing for fast merge joins and also
the use of zone maps and this
compression can allow you to denormalize
data without heavy overhead or penalty
and incremental storage allowing you to
simplify queries and limit joins and
here's an example of square query Optima
optimization on that data sent that we
talked about before we're going to
denormalize commonly joined attributes
into a large table in this case bringing
inquiries enquiry airports and
enquiry airport groups together into one large
fact table using a star schema using
inquiry ideas our distribution key and
our sort key and then we're going to
cash the other services using DISTSTYLE ALL
which is a attribute that you can
effect when creating a table if you set
specified this style all when creating a
table this will lead to a copy of the
entire table being distributed to every
node in your cluster it's a great help
in boosting performance for small for
small tables that you want to have cache
locally all the rows in these tables for
any join will be available on every node
obviously this increases storage
requirements and it also increases load
and maintenance time for the table but
it can significantly improve execution
time when used with certain dimension
tables where key distribution is not
appropriate but you need to weigh
performance improvements against the
maintenance and storage overhead costs
so it's good for small tables that sit
around the edge of your star schema that
are frequently looked up and joined when
executing queries on that large fact
table look caught that forms the core of
the schema so might want to consider
that as an option the last thing to talk
about on table design not so much about
design is more about maintenance really
there's a vacuuming operation which
needs to be used to clean up tables
after a bulk delete load or series of
incremental updates this is quite
important amazon redshift does not
automatically reclaim the new space that
is free when you delete rows and update
rose to perform an update amazon
redshift deletes the original row and
appends the updated row so every update
is effectively delete followed by an
insert Rosa marked for deletion but not
removed and the query processor will
scan deleted rows as well as those that
are undeleted so if you have too many
deleted rose you're going to cost
yourself overhead cycles and unnecessary
processing you can resolve this by
vacuuming tables or even the entire
database when you've concluded a
significant number of updates or deletes
this will reclaim space it will purge
those deleted rows and it will improve
query performance it's an important
aspect of operating clusters if you're
going to run them for a long period of
time and make significant updates or
deletes to them want to learn more about
table design there's some excellent
resources that you can take advantage of
in the redshift documentation which is a
really very comprehensive documentation
set the table design docs that you can
see there and a table design tutorial
and this table design tutorials great
actually it takes you through an example
of how you can optimize table design in
this tutorial you will start by creating
tables based on a star schema benchmark
schema without sort keys without
distribution styles and without
compression encodings you'll then load
the tables and test data and system
performance then you'll apply best
practices recreating the tables using
sort keys and distribution styles
you'll reload the tables with test data
using automatic compression and your
test performance again and if you do
this you'll be able to see firsthand the
performance benefits of well-designed
tables the whole tutorial costs about a
dollar to run and takes about an hour to
run so really would recommend if you've
not already worked through that as part
of your experimental work with Amazon
redshift you pick that tutorial up and
take advantage of it it'll get you
hands-on with the system with a real
data set and they'll allow you to see in
practice some of the benefits that you
can achieve through using these
optimization techniques next thing we're
going to talk about is data loading and
just to provide you a quick overview
there's a very rich ecosystem of AWS
services that you can take advantage of
to help you load data into amazon
redshift clusters we have integration
with many AWS persistent services
like RDS Oracle or MySql
that you might be running on
instances that you manage yourself data
volumes Amazon Elastic MapReduce and
glacier our low-cost archiving service
you can also bring data in from
corporate data center resources
running on your own premises or in
current location facilities using a
variety of different options actually
Direct Connect which is our low latency
high bandwidth direct connection service
enabling you to connect your data center
or network directly to an AWS region
using one gigabit 10 gigabit or
fractional bandwidth provided by
partners so if you regularly loading
data into amazon redshift that could be
a good option for you can also use a VPN
connection which will terminate inside
your VPC on a VPN gateway and you can
connect to from your own site that
allows you to secure the transportation
of data across the internet using
encryption and authorization techniques
and then we have the s3 public API
endpoint you can write to using s3
multi-part upload it's a very high
performance and effective way to get
data into Amazon s3 that you can then
unload from there into redshift and we
have several options now for
import/export so these this is a
mechanism for getting data into AWS
using physical media either the AWS
import/export disk service where you can
send media of your choice to many
different AWS regions around the world
we will load that I'll load the data
that is on those media into s3 and make
it available to you in your account or
in North America you can take advantage
of the AWS import/export snowball it
allows you to import up to 50 terabytes
of data with a single device we provide
the device which is a organized
data transport device you can use that
currently in the one region in us-west
and in the us-east-1 region to load
data into Amazon s3 at really high scale
very very rapidly so you've got large
data sets that you wish to move into
Amazon redshift those AWS import export
options can be a good solution for you
you can also share data the other way so
you can dump data from your redshift
database storing it in encrypted CSV
files you can upload that data to s3 and
you can share that date with other AWS
accounts of course so you can take data
out of redshift as well as taking it
into redshift and s3 is a common
mechanism for getting data into these
services we've already said for best
performance it's an excellent idea to
split data files into a number of different
sub files and then you can parallel load
these using the copy command across all
the available nodes in your cluster here
you can see we're using file suffixes so
we're copying customer from s3 providing
a prefix and all files that have that
prefix will be evaluated and loaded into
Amazon redshift in parallel providing a
set of credentials which have
appropriate access authority to the
Amazon s3 endpoint so that we can read
data from that specific bucket and read
these specific objects and then we're
specifying a delimiter and there are
actually many good examples of different
approaches the loading data that you can
find if you check out the URL you can
see on the screen in the bottom left as
many different data loading scenarios
that are explored with worked examples
of that URL some issues that you should
try to avoid when loading data many of
these are quite obviously it's
worthwhile running through them anyway
so firstly avoid mismatches make sure
that data types in tables and values in
input data fields match each other make
sure you have the right number of
columns make sure that you have
mismatched quotes so you don't have
mismatched quotes redshifts support
single and double quotes quotes but the
most these must be balanced
appropriately so red double quote must
match a double crow in a single quote
which map must match single quote dates
and times obviously to be in the correct
format where you have numeric columns
with range control you need to make sure
that all entries are within the range
which is valid and where yet may have an
issue where the number of distinct
volumes values for a column may exceed
the limitation which compression
encoding again the reason it's a good
idea to use automatic compression
encoding using the copy command you can
also load data using direct SQL all
direct SQL commands go via the leader
node so this is not a parallel load
model but you can use it for for example
joining staging tables with pre-existing
target tables and in this scenario it
will update where rows exists and insert
where no rows exists there are
performance limitations here because
you're relying upon the leader
no it should not really be used for
large-scale data loading operations but
it is available for you for example if
you wanted to load in some of those
smaller tables that we described as
being around the outside of that star
schema that might be a useful way to do
that I recommend loading large data sets
using the copy command as you can see
here it's definitely best practice use a
single copy command which will allow you
to parallel load rather than load in
series compress your data files with
gzip once again to optimize the speed at
which data files can be ingested by the
nodes if you cannot use copy you can use
multirow inserts using SQL as we've
described already so bulk insert
operations they provide high performance
data insertion also some further best
practices load your day to insert key
order to avoid the need to vacuum at the
end of the process and organize your
data as a series of time series tables
each table is identical but contains
different data for time ranges then
those can be parallel loaded by
different load different nodes in your
cluster you can use staging tables to
perform an upset and as we said earlier
run the vacuum command whenever you've
added deleted or modified a large number of rows
unless you load your data in sort key order
you can increase memory
available to copy or vacuum
and you can run the analyze command whenever you've
made changes to your data to ensure that
your table statistics are current so and
follow those best practices and
obviously this further best practice
guidance in the documentation for this
service so once you've got your data
into amazon redshift how do you go about
working with it there's several
different usage scenarios here but a
common usage scenario is staging data
that you might be creating in an online
transaction processing ERP system you're
going to store that information in an
RDBMS on your premises and this is quite
a common use case by no means the only
use case another common flow might be
unstructured data pre-processed and
enriched using for example EMR our
elastic MapReduce
managed service running register running
Hadoop in the AWS cloud it's also a
common workflow that customers will use
using Hadoop to pre-process data and
then loading it into amazon redshift by
creating files they staged an amazon s3
that they can a little load in using
that copy command in the use case of
data integration between existing
RDBMS systems though it's quite common
for customers to use one of the data
integration partners from the Amazon
redshift ecosystem you
can use VPC an encryption to make sure
that your data remains secure all times
if you do this
several different options but those provided by our data integration partners so a good option
here these technologies work to connect
operational data stores with redshift
they make transporting data over
distance very simple and it makes it
easy to transfer data between different
database types with little operational
effort a little operational overhead you
can find out more about these partners
if you visit the URL that you see there
but we have a variety of different
partners that you might want to take
advantage for data integration obviously
when you've got your data into the
system you're then interested in
business intelligence and visualization
of that data this is where you make a
take advantage of those standard JDBC
and odbc connectivity drivers that we
provide again there's a rich ecosystem
of different partners available to help
you with this and you can find those at
the same URL it's actually very broad
different ecosystem a very very broad
ecosystem different types of provider
that are operating to provide
visualization services many of these bi
and visualization tools are available
through something called the AWS
marketplace and this is an e-commerce
platform that provides ISVs with an
opportunity to market and sell software
products to AWS customers and if you
visit this URL
aws.amazon.com/marketplace/redshift
you'll find a wide variety of marketplace products
so 20 different products that are aligned
directly to the redshift use case and
if you visit the business intelligence
section on the market place you'll find
over 200 different software products
that have business intelligence features
so have many different options open to
you here are three of the options that
are available under the analytics
category from looker from tableau and
from tibco jaspersoft with a variety of
different licensing options variety
different cost points the great thing
about the AWS marketplace is many of the
ISVs that have products listed there
provide free trials and many of these
free trials can be bootstrap directly
from the marketplace without having to
speak to or make contact with the ISVs
in question so it's an excellent way for
trying out different visualization tools
different bi tools that were available
to I really would recommend that
customers do take a look at it we also
recently announced that the AWS reinvent
a just a couple of weeks ago a brand-new
AWS business intelligence service called
Amazon quick sight this is a fast cloud
platt easy to use P I service that makes
it easier to build visualizations
perform ad hoc analysis and quickly get
insights from data here we're
integrating with AWS data stores like
amazon redshift as well as other stores
like flat files and third-party data
sources and we provide an in-memory
query engine that means it's possible to
get your first analyses from your day to
in less than 60 seconds very beautiful
and dynamic data visualizations sharing
features so you can share analytics with
people in or outside your organization
the capability as I said to integrate
with data sources on AWS and it comes at
about the tenth the cost of traditional
ly licensed old guard business
intelligence tools I'm going to say a
whole lot more about Amazon quick site
during today's session but if you want
to see the launch it reinvent and also
see a demo from my colleague Matt would
talking about capabilities of quick site
and visually illustrating these in the
form of a demo visit the youtube link
that you can see at the bottom right of
this slide you can see under Jesse's
announcement of the surveys followed by
matt's demo from reinvent just a couple
of weeks ago so that might be something
that you also
consider as we make it generally
available over the coming months back up
and restoration this is very important
feature of Amazon redshift and the first
thing to say is that back up stammers
and s3 automatic continuous and
incremental so it's not something that
you need to configure other than
configuring the snapshot interval and
the snapshot retention period so how
often do you wish to store a snapshot of
your data and how long do you wish to
retain these snapshots for those two
variables by the way default to a
one-day snapshot interval and a 35-day
retention period so your recovery point
objective for this service is 24 hours
essentially with the default settings
you can also create user driven
snapshots at any time you simply
freezing the cluster state triggering a
snapshot via the console or API and that
frozen cluster state will be retained
unless you explicitly delete it you have
control on how your clusters backups are
stored in that particular scenario any
point you can restore a cluster from a
snapshot and make it available for
querying as it was in the state at the
time the snapshot was taken and it's a
very very simple process here's an
example of how you go about restoring
from a snapshot so I'm looking here at
the cluster console in the redshift
console and I'm going to click into the
detail of the my cluster cluster that's
running and at this point i have several
drop downs available to me i can click
the create snapshot button and i'll be
given the option at this point to
restore from a snapshot if i click that
restore from snapshot option and as to
define the characteristics of the new
cluster that i wish to create so for
example can restore on to a different
node type here and i do have to change
the name of my cluster identifier when I
do this restoration so I'm going to
modify my cluster identifier here and
then restore that cluster from a
snapshot with the name restored dash my
cluster
hit restore at the bottom and at this
point my cluster my new cluster will go
into creation and restoration mode and
actually at the point at which creation
has been completed but restoration is
still underway at this point I can begin
to make queries against my newly
restored cluster this is where that
background streaming of the restoration
process comes into effect and I can
actually work with data in my cluster
while it's still in the process of being
restored I'll be given a new JDBC odbc
endpoint that can work with for that
restored snapshot version of my cluster
which is distinct from the current
cluster that have running in my console
you can already see that and that's how
simple it is so it's one two three four
five step process to restore cluster
from a snapshot that you've previously
created very very simple so close to
date your application automated backups
on s3 and note monitoring all
availability features that are intended
to make the redshift service durable and
ensure that it meets the availability
level that you need ok what about
upgrading and scaling clusters did just
say at the top of the session that this
was a very simple process and
essentially what happens here is you can
resize a cluster while it remains online
so what will happen when you go to
resize is it will put your cluster into
read-only mode ok this is a very simple
process so you're going to specify
resize switch your existing cluster into
read only or provision a new clerk
cluster in the background will copy data
in parallel from node to node in us in a
seamless and transparent manner and
during this process you will only be
charged for the source cluster at the
point at which the new cluster is
available the SQL endpoint will switch
over via dns so your tools will continue
to work but you'll look be looking at
the new and large cluster you've been
read write mode at this point and then
in the background we will decommission
the source cluster and charging
obviously we will flick over onto the
new cluster at the point at which that
endpoints which is over so taking you
through that in the console once again
we're in the cluster console here we can
click on our cluster drop down you'll
see there's a resize option there that
appears if we select that you'll see
this resize cluster dialog
you can change the node type the cluster
type and the number of nodes here I've
increased my node count to eight I've
gone off single node operation on to
eight nodes and I'm then into a
transparent operation so I don't create
a new endpoint in this scenario in the
background the cluster will be switched
into read-only mode you can view resize
progress in the cluster status tab there
and obviously the time it takes to
resize of cluster will depend on the
amount of data that's in each node
typically it takes from a couple of
hours up to a day of their clusters with
large amounts of data might take even
longer than that this is because data is
copied in parallel from each node on the
source cloud each node on the source
cluster to each node on the target okay
there's much more information about
resizing that you can see if you follow
the URL you can see at the bottom left
of this slide so check out cluster
resizing that the end of the process the
endpoint will be switched over and the
service will be made available for me once more
take a look now quickly at
some recently announced features for
Amazon redshift just to bring you right
up to date with new stuff that's been
announced for this service the first
desired trail at the top of the session
is something called scalar user defined
functions you can write these
user-defined functions using Python 2.7
syntax largely identical to the postgres
SQL UDF syntax for security reasons we
prohibit system and network calls within
udfs but you can basically take
advantage of pre-installed Python
modules pandas numpy and scifi to
perform analytic data analytic
processing of your data in Python and
this analytic processing takes place in
parallel across your cluster so like a
regular redshift query it will take
advantage of IO CPU and memory capacity
in each one of the nodes in your cluster
there's a very very powerful feature
there's much more on that in Jeff bars
recent blog post that you can find if
you visit the Amazon redshift category
on the official AWS blog it's a very
powerful feature it enables you to
simplify data manipulation as well as an
excellent example of
working with URLs in data using UDFs
in Jeff's blog so check that of you
interested in user-defined functions in Python
last announcement before that was
the announcement of the new ds2 instance
family which I already talked about the
top of the session when we were
describing the different nodes that you
can use to construct your redshift
cluster this is a pretty big upgrade
actually delivering twice the memory and
compute power of their previous dense
storage pretty assessors which used to
call the dw1 stain same storage
capacity this node type also supports
enhanced networking and provides fifty
percent more disks throughput than the
ds1 so it was a big performance bump for
Amazon redshift when we release that
back in June this year this also details
on that post on cost optimization using
reserved instances I would recommend
taking a look at that post if you
interested in getting up to date with
reserved instance pricing for Amazon
redshift also okay resources that you
can use to learn more about Amazon
redshift the first resource of course is
the Amazon redshift product detail page
you can find many of the resources that
I've talked about during the session
linked off this page including the
documentation sets for Amazon redshift
for some of the best documentation of any
AWS service in my view getting started
guide that we touched upon earlier in
the session please do check that out
also check out the table design tutorial
you can find a link to that gang started
guide now trail but early but it really
is excellent and well worth taking a
look at one dollar one hour and you can
learn hands-on how to optimize table
design with Amazon redshift you can find
the Financial Times reference that I've
talked about as well as many other
examples of customers that are running
analytics workloads in the AWS cloud at
awsamazon.com/solutions/case-studies/analytics around 30 or so
different customer case studies are
there worth taking a look at you may
very well find someone that's got a very
similar use case to you they've already
implemented using Amazon redshift
it's also an awesome session from AWS
reinvent 2015 just a couple of weeks old
where we dive deep into Amazon redshift
tuning and best practices it's with Eric
Ferreria from AWS and airy Miller from
tripadvisor you can find that if you
click the youtube link that you can see
at the bottom of the text on this
particular slide and if you do that
you'll also see a playlist pop up in
YouTube that playlist contains all other
big data and analytics sessions from AWS
reinvent including additional content on
amazon redshift and on building data
pipelines to use Redshift and on using
EMR and other analytic services have
been used and built by customers using
the AWS cloud so I really would advise
you to check out both this video and the
playlist you can find that I've got as
my colleague two switches into Q&A mode
in just a second so you can rate us when
we wrap up the webinar just remind you
that we are accepting your questions
during today's session and we'll come
back to you with feedback over the
course of the next week or two if you do
submit a question during today's session
so if there's anything that you'd like
to know more about that we've covered
the day or any other Amazon redshift or
other Amazon topics for that matter
amazon web services topic so that one
that you interested in please ask a
question using that Q&A panel and we'll
get back to you training and
certification if you want to build your
AWS knowledge more generally and check
out these self-paced labs training and
certification options the AWS amazon com
/ training URL contains details of all
AWS training offerings and is well worth
look if you've not already taken a look
at it that concludes all the content
that we have for today's session and ask
my colleague to switches into Q&A mode
now so you can give us a rating please
give this webinar a rating between one
and five with five being the best if you
want to leave us quality feedback about
how we've done of course you can do that
using the Q&A panel as well as well as
continuing to submit your questions
going to leave the webinar open for 10
minutes or so so make sure we've got all
of your questions today and give you an
opportunity to rate us also like to
encourage you to follow a double us on
social media on Twitter actually stay up
to date with us globally aw
cloud stay up to date with AWS news and
education events here in the UK and
Ireland AWS underscore UK I and you can
find me on twitter at enm as well like
to thank you for giving up your time to
join today's session and do appreciate
you giving you time to learn a little
bit more about AWS hope it was a useful
session for you today please keep
submitting your questions and I'll see
you on another AWS webinar very very
soon thanks very much